Appendix C
How to implement a Prolog node




The preceding chapters have described Web Prolog chiefly from the programmer’s
point of view. This appendix turns the system around and asks what a node im-
plementer must provide. The answer depends on the node’s profile, its host Prolog
system, and the environment in which it is deployed.
    At the time of writing, the demonstrator provides substantial implementations of
all four profiles, including native and browser-resident actors, cross-node commu-
nication, source installation, statechart actors, authentication, policy enforcement,
resource limits, and administrative facilities. It should nevertheless be regarded as
a research implementation, not as a final interoperable standard or a production
platform suitable for arbitrary deployment. In particular, there is not yet a second
independent implementation against which its observable behaviour can be tested.
    The distinction matters throughout this appendix. The public interfaces are spec-
ified in Appendix A; the code below is explanatory. Some fragments closely follow
the demonstrator, while others deliberately omit machinery that would obscure the
central idea. Whenever a fragment is pedagogical rather than complete, we say so
and identify what a deployable implementation must add.



C.1 From a profile to a running node

A Prolog node is not simply a Prolog system with an HTTP server attached. Even
the least capable public node must translate between a network request and a Prolog
computation while preserving the contracts for terms, answers, errors, limits, and
profiles. More capable nodes add persistent execution contexts, actors, distribution,
and lifecycle management.
   The profiles therefore imply a progression of implementation responsibilities:
relation.
   Parse a call to an owner-defined relation, execute it within the advertised relation




                                                                                   359
360                                                    C How to implement a Prolog node

    surface, and encode its answers. Such a node need not implement ISO Prolog
    generally and need not itself be written in Prolog.
isobase.
    Add the advertised ISOBASE language fragment, the stateless /call API, term
    and error conversion, and bounded nondeterministic query evaluation.
isotope.
    Add private execution contexts, source installation, and the semi-stateful toplevel
    API. The node must retain query state between requests and reclaim it when a
    session is stopped, halted, abandoned, or expired.
actor.
    Add actors, mailboxes, selective receive, links, monitors, naming, remote place-
    ment, actor I/O, and the stateful WebSocket protocol. The actor profile also
    requires a clear account of isolation and of the lifetime relationship between a
    client, a connection, and the actors created through it.

These are language and protocol responsibilities. A public deployment adds another
layer: authentication, authorisation, sandboxing, quotas, overload control, transport
security, logging, observability, and administration. A small teaching implementation
can omit that layer. An Internet-facing node cannot.



C.1.1 A useful decomposition

The native demonstrator separates the request path into several layers. The exact
module boundaries are implementation choices, but the decomposition is portable:
 1. A transport adapter accepts HTTP or WebSocket input and converts it into a
    typed internal request.
 2. Authentication identifies a principal, and profile and capability checks decide
    whether that principal may perform the requested operation.
 3. Input validation checks term size, syntax, source options, relation visibility, and
    the permitted language fragment.
 4. An execution-context layer creates or selects the private database, actor, toplevel,
    or stateless query engine in which the goal will run.
 5. The runtime applies time, inference, memory, actor, mailbox, and result limits
    as appropriate.
 6. A response layer converts success, failure, errors, prompts, output, and lifecycle
    events into the representation required by the transport.
This order is significant. Validation must occur before untrusted source is loaded or
an untrusted goal is called, and resource ownership must be established before work
is started. Conversely, transport-specific JSON or WebSocket details should not leak
into the actor and query semantics.
C.2 A native node on top of SWI-Prolog                                          361

C.2 A native node on top of SWI-Prolog

The native demonstrator wraps a node around SWI-Prolog. Native threads supply the
scheduling substrate for actors, temporary modules supply private clause databases,
and the HTTP and WebSocket libraries supply the network transports. This is not
the only possible design, but it shows how much of a node can be implemented as a
library on top of a mature Prolog system.



C.2.1 The stateless HTTP endpoint

Chapter 5.3 developed answer terms and Chapter 4 showed how rpc/2-3 recon-
structs Prolog nondeterminism from stateless HTTP responses. We do not repeat
those client-side mechanisms here. Instead, the following program implements a
small but complete stateless endpoint. It accepts Prolog-formatted calls only; JSON,
source installation, and policy enforcement are added later by more capable imple-
mentations.
:- use_module(library(http/http_server)).
:- use_module(library(http/http_parameters)).
:- use_module(library(solution_sequences)).

:- http_handler(root(call), call_handler, []).

node(Port) :-
    http_server(http_dispatch, [port(Port)]).

call_handler(Request) :-
    http_parameters(Request, [
        goal(GoalAtom, [atom]),
        template(TemplateAtom, [
            atom,
            default(GoalAtom)
        ]),
        offset(Offset, [integer, default(0)]),
        limit(Limit, [
            integer,
            default(10 000 000 000)
        ]),
        format(prolog, [default(prolog)])
    ]),
    parse_goal_template(
        GoalAtom, TemplateAtom, Goal, Template
    ),
362                                      C How to implement a Prolog node

      compute_answer(Goal, Template, Offset, Limit, Answer),
      reply_prolog(Answer).

parse_goal_template(GoalAtom, TemplateAtom, Goal, Template) :-
    atomic_list_concat([
        ’(’, GoalAtom, ’)+(’, TemplateAtom, ’)’
    ], Text),
    read_term_from_atom(Text, Goal+Template, [
        syntax_errors(error)
    ]).

compute_answer(Goal, Template, Offset, Limit, Answer) :-
    once(answer(Goal, Template, Offset, Limit, Answer)).

answer(Goal, Template, Offset, Limit, Answer) :-
    catch(
        call_cleanup(
            slice(Goal, Template, Offset, Limit, Slice),
            Deterministic = true
        ),
        Error,
        true
    ),
    (   nonvar(Error)
    -> Answer = error(Error)
    ;   Slice == []
    -> Answer = failure
    ;   var(Deterministic)
    -> Answer = success(Slice, true)
    ;   Answer = success(Slice, false)
    ).

slice(Goal, Template, Offset, Limit, Slice) :-
    findnsols(
        Limit,
        Template,
        offset(Offset, Goal),
        Slice
    ).

reply_prolog(Answer) :-
    format(
        ’Content-type: application/x-prolog; charset=UTF-8˜n˜n’
    ),
    write_term(Answer, [
C.2 A native node on top of SWI-Prolog                                              363

           quoted(true),
           numbervars(true),
           fullstop(true),
           nl(true)
     ]).
The goal and template are parsed together so that occurrences of the same vari-
able name denote the same variable. A call to once/1 makes the HTTP handler
deterministic even though answer/5 is itself nondeterministic.
    This program must be bound only to a trusted local interface. It executes arbitrary
goals with the authority of the host Prolog process. The complete node surrounds
the call to the query engine with parsing limits, authentication, profile and relation
checks, sandbox validation, a private execution context, time and inference lim-
its, maintenance and overload checks, and response logging. Those are substantial
subsystems, so we describe their placement rather than disguise them as undefined
predicates in an otherwise executable example.



C.2.2 Avoiding spurious recomputation

The compute answer/5 implementation above is correct, but successive HTTP
requests may repeat work. Consider a goal whose first solution is expensive and
whose second solution is cheap:
?- time((sleep(1), X=foo ; X=bar)).
X = foo ;
X = bar.
?-

If the two solutions are requested in separate slices, a purely offset-based imple-
mentation recomputes the expensive first branch when serving the second request.
More generally, computing the 𝑛th slice requires recomputing and discarding the
preceding 𝑛 − 1 slices.
    The demonstrator avoids this by retaining a bounded cache of suspended toplevel
actors. After producing a non-final slice, a toplevel is waiting at the PTCP slice
boundary with its remaining choice points intact. The node may associate that
continuation with the next offset. A later request for the same computation can
resume the actor rather than repeat the search.
    This does not turn the HTTP interface into a client session. The cached actor is an
internal optimisation: the client neither receives its pid nor gains exclusive ownership
of it. The node may expire or evict it, in which case a later request is recomputed
from the information carried by that request.
364                                                    C How to implement a Prolog node

Keys, ownership, and cleanup

A cache key must contain every input that can affect the computation, including the
goal, template, installed source, and relevant evaluation options. Treating a bounded
term hash/2 result as a unique identity would be unsound unless collisions are
checked. A simple pedagogical implementation can instead retain the canonical
term itself:
goal_key(Goal-Template-Source-Once, Key) :-
    copy_term(Goal-Template-Source-Once, Key),
    numbervars(Key, 0, _).
A production key may use a hash for indexing, but it must still establish equality of the
full canonical input. It may also have to include the node instance or execution-policy
context so that continuations are not mixed across incompatible authorities.
   The following alternative implementation exposes the control structure of the
cache. It is complete except for the public toplevel * predicates implemented in
Section 5.3. A private message queue is used for the answer so that the HTTP worker
does not consume an unrelated actor message:
:- use_module(library(aggregate)).

:- dynamic cached/3.

max_cache_size(100).

compute_answer_cached(Goal, Template, Offset, Limit,
                      Source, Answer) :-
    goal_key(Goal-Template-Source-false, Key),
    setup_call_cleanup(
        message_queue_create(Queue),
        compute_answer_cached(
            Queue, Key, Goal, Template, Offset, Limit, Source,
            Answer
        ),
        message_queue_destroy(Queue)
    ).

compute_answer_cached(Queue, Key, Goal, Template, Offset,
                      Limit, Source, Answer) :-
    (   take_cached(Key, Offset, Pid)
    -> toplevel_next(Pid, [
            limit(Limit),
            target(Queue)
        ])
    ;   spawn_options(Source, Queue, SpawnOptions),
C.2 A native node on top of SWI-Prolog                      365

           toplevel_spawn(Pid, SpawnOptions),
           toplevel_call(Pid, Goal, [
               template(Template),
               offset(Offset),
               limit(Limit),
               target(Queue)
           ])
     ),
     await_slice(Queue, Key, Offset, Limit, Pid, Answer).

spawn_options(’’, Queue, [
    session(false),
    target(Queue)
]) :-
    !.
spawn_options(Source, Queue, [
    session(false),
    target(Queue),
    src_text(Source)
]).

await_slice(Queue, Key, Offset, Limit, Pid, Answer) :-
    (   thread_get_message(Queue, Message, [timeout(30)])
    -> slice_message(
            Message, Key, Offset, Limit, Pid, Answer
        )
    ;   stop_toplevel(Pid),
        Answer = error(timeout)
    ).

slice_message(success(Pid, Slice, true),
              Key, Offset, Limit, Pid,
              success(Slice, true)) :-
    Next is Offset + Limit,
    save_cached(Key, Next, Pid).
slice_message(success(Pid, Slice, false),
              _, _, _, Pid, success(Slice, false)).
slice_message(failure(Pid),
              _, _, _, Pid, failure).
slice_message(error(Pid, Error),
              _, _, _, Pid, error(Error)).
slice_message(Message, _, _, _, Pid,
              error(unexpected_message(Message))) :-
    stop_toplevel(Pid).
366                                                  C How to implement a Prolog node

take_cached(Key, Offset, Pid) :-
    with_mutex(
        continuation_cache,
        once(retract(cached(Key, Offset, Pid)))
    ).

save_cached(Key, Offset, Pid) :-
    with_mutex(
        continuation_cache,
        (
            assertz(cached(Key, Offset, Pid)),
            evict_excess(Evicted)
        )
    ),
    dispose_cached(Evicted).

evict_excess(Evicted) :-
    max_cache_size(Max),
    aggregate_all(count, cached(_, _, _), Count),
    (   Count > Max
    -> once(retract(cached(_, _, Evicted)))
    ;   Evicted = none
    ).

dispose_cached(none) :-
    !.
dispose_cached(Pid) :-
    stop_toplevel(Pid).

stop_toplevel(Pid) :-
    catch(toplevel_halt(Pid), _, true).
The mutex makes acquisition and insertion race-safe. Eviction removes the old-
est clause and terminates its toplevel rather than merely forgetting its pid. To use
this version in the HTTP controller, replace its call to compute answer/5 with
compute answer cached/6 and pass the empty atom as the source.
   The example has a size bound but no expiry clock. The demonstrator also asso-
ciates an alarm with every cache entry, cancels the alarm when the entry is acquired,
and terminates the toplevel when the entry expires. It further uses a node-specific
cache key and preserves the timeout budget while discarding unrelated internal
messages.
C.2 A native node on top of SWI-Prolog                                             367

C.2.3 Implementing the actor primitives

The actor layer can be explained economically on a Prolog system that implements
the ISO thread draft. The following host predicates provide the principal mechanisms:
  Web Prolog                                      Host Prolog

  spawn/1-3                                       thread_create/3
  self/1                                          thread_self/1
  send/2, !/2                                     thread_send_message/2
  receive/1-2                                     thread_get_message/3
  exit/2                                          thread_signal/2
This table is only a starting point. A thread identifier is not a Web Prolog pid, and a
thread queue does not by itself implement links, monitors, names, remote addressing,
private databases, or the specified selective-receive semantics. The implementation
must place an actor layer between the public predicates and the host thread API.


Pids and process creation

The small implementation below separates pids from host thread identifiers. The
mappings also make it possible for a distribution layer to replace the local pid
generator without exposing thread identities to programs.
:- use_module(library(option)).

:- op(800, xfx, !).

:- meta_predicate
    spawn(0),
    spawn(0, -),
    spawn(0, -, +).

:- dynamic pid_thread/2.
:- dynamic thread_pid/2.
:- dynamic link/2.
:- dynamic monitor/3.
:- dynamic exit_reason/2.

:- thread_local parent/1.

:- initialization(init_main_actor, after_load).

init_main_actor :-
    thread_self(Thread),
368                                       C How to implement a Prolog node

      (    thread_pid(Thread, _)
      ->   true
      ;    fresh_pid(Pid),
           assertz(pid_thread(Pid, Thread)),
           assertz(thread_pid(Thread, Pid))
      ).

self(Pid) :-
    thread_self(Thread),
    thread_pid(Thread, Pid).

fresh_pid(Pid) :-
    flag(web_prolog_pid, N, N + 1),
    Pid is 10 000 000 + N.

spawn(Goal) :-
    spawn(Goal, _).

spawn(Goal, Pid) :-
    spawn(Goal, Pid, []).

spawn(Goal, Pid, Options) :-
    self(Parent),
    fresh_pid(Pid),
    thread_create(
        actor_boot(Parent, Pid, Goal, Options),
        Thread,
        [at_exit(actor_stopped(Pid))]
    ),
    assertz(pid_thread(Pid, Thread)),
    assertz(thread_pid(Thread, Pid)),
    thread_send_message(Thread, ’$start’),
    thread_get_message(initialized(Pid)).

actor_boot(Parent, Pid, Goal, Options) :-
    thread_get_message(’$start’),
    assertz(parent(Parent)),
    install_lifetime_options(Parent, Pid, Options),
    Parent ! initialized(Pid),
    call(Goal).

install_lifetime_options(Parent, Pid, Options) :-
    option(link(Link), Options, true),
    (   Link == true
    -> assertz(link(Parent, Pid))
C.2 A native node on top of SWI-Prolog                                           369

     ;   true
     ),
     option(monitor(Monitor), Options, false),
     (   Monitor == true
     -> assertz(monitor(Parent, Pid, Pid))
     ;   true
     ).
The counter in fresh pid/1 is sufficient for this single-runtime sketch. A node must
prevent pid reuse and collision across concurrent allocation, and its distribution
layer must add the node component of the canonical pid. The private ’$start’
message prevents the child from using its pid before the parent has installed the two
mappings. The spawn-time monitor uses the pid itself as its reference, matching the
public convention documented in Appendix A. A separately installed monitor would
receive a fresh opaque reference.
   When an actor terminates, the runtime applies the lifetime relations and reports
the reason:
actor_stopped(Pid) :-
    termination_reason(Pid, Reason),
    forall(
        retract(link(Pid, Child)),
        exit(Child, kill)
    ),
    retractall(link(_, Pid)),
    forall(
        retract(monitor(Watcher, Pid, Ref)),
        Watcher ! down(Pid, Ref, Reason)
    ),
    retract(pid_thread(Pid, Thread)),
    retractall(thread_pid(Thread, Pid)).

termination_reason(Pid, Reason) :-
    retract(exit_reason(Pid, Reason)),
    !.
termination_reason(Pid, Reason) :-
    pid_thread(Pid, Thread),
    thread_property(Thread, status(Reason)).

This makes links directional: if the parent terminates, its linked children are ter-
minated, whereas termination of a child does not by itself terminate the parent.
Monitoring is observational and produces down(Pid,Ref,Reason).
370                                                   C How to implement a Prolog node

Sending and termination

Local sending resolves the pid to a thread and delegates copying and queueing to the
host:

Pid ! Message :-
    send(Pid, Message).

send(Pid, Message) :-
    (   pid_thread(Pid, Thread)
    -> catch(
             thread_send_message(Thread, Message),
             error(existence_error(_, _), _),
             true
        )
    ;   true
    ).
Sending to a pid that no longer exists is a no-op. Sending to an unknown registered
name is different: the public interface reports an existence error because the name is
a deliberate promise made by the node.
   Self-termination records the reason before unwinding the actor. Termination of
another local actor is implemented as a host-thread interrupt:
exit(Reason) :-
    self(Self),
    asserta(exit_reason(Self, Reason)),
    abort.

exit(Pid, Reason) :-
    (   pid_thread(Pid, Thread)
    -> catch(
             thread_signal(Thread, exit(Reason)),
             error(existence_error(_, _), _),
             true
        )
    ;   true
    ).
The real implementation must serialise termination with monitor installation and
removal so that a monitor is either removed or notified exactly once. It must also
translate host termination statuses into the documented Web Prolog reasons.
C.2 A native node on top of SWI-Prolog                                       371

Selective receive

Host message queues already support pattern-directed reception, but Web Prolog
receive clauses also have ordering, optional guards, and committed selection. One
clear implementation keeps unmatched messages in a thread-local deferred queue:
:- thread_local deferred/1.

receive(Clauses) :-
    receive(Clauses, []).

receive(Clauses, Options) :-
    thread_self(Mailbox),
    (   clause(deferred(Message), true, Ref),
        select_body(Clauses, Message, Body)
    -> erase(Ref),
        call(Body)
    ;   receive_new(Mailbox, Clauses, Options)
    ).

receive_new(Mailbox, Clauses, Options) :-
    (   thread_get_message(Mailbox, Message, Options)
    -> (    select_body(Clauses, Message, Body)
        -> call(Body)
        ;   assertz(deferred(Message)),
            receive_new(Mailbox, Clauses, Options)
        )
    ;   option(on_timeout(Body), Options, true),
        call(Body)
    ).

select_body({Clauses}, Message, Body) :-
    select_clause(Clauses, Message, Body),
    !.

select_clause((Clause ; _), Message, Body) :-
    select_clause(Clause, Message, Body).
select_clause((_ ; Clauses), Message, Body) :-
    select_clause(Clauses, Message, Body).
select_clause((Head -> Body), Message, Body) :-
    (   Head = if(Pattern, Guard)
    -> subsumes_term(Pattern, Message),
        Pattern = Message,
        catch(once(Guard), _, fail)
    ;   subsumes_term(Head, Message),
        Head = Message
372                                                    C How to implement a Prolog node

      ).
The cut commits to the first matching message and clause. The selected body is then
an ordinary Prolog goal and may itself have several solutions; backtracking through
that body never returns the consumed message to the mailbox.
   This fragment omits module propagation, detailed option checking, and the atomic
interaction between deferred and newly arriving messages. Those are important in
an implementation, but they do not alter the semantic idea: scan in arrival order,
preserve messages that do not currently match, and commit when a receive clause is
selected.


Why the real actor layer is larger

The preceding code is intentionally smaller than the demonstrator. The real native
runtime additionally provides:
  • collision-safe opaque pids and monitor references;
  • atomic monitor installation, dead-pid notification, and demonitor/1-2 with
    optional flushing;
  • registered actor names and node-resident service names;
  • delayed sends and cancellation;
  • spawn admission and per-actor stack limits;
  • private execution modules and controlled source installation;
  • hooks for remote spawn, send, exit, monitoring, and naming;
  • checks that terms crossing a Worker or network boundary have a portable rep-
    resentation; and
  • cleanup for failed actor initialisation, node shutdown, and abandoned sessions.
These are not embellishments. They are what turns a mapping from actors to threads
into a node that preserves the same public semantics under failure, concurrency,
and distribution. The pedagogical core remains useful because it shows where each
of those additions attaches. In particular, the sketch implements the spawn-time
monitor(true) option but deliberately does not present a naı̈ve monitor/2 imple-
mentation: correct monitoring of an independently supplied pid requires the atomic
dead-pid and termination handling described above.



C.2.4 Actor I/O

Actor I/O is expressed as a message protocol rather than as access to the host process’s
terminal. The basic predicates can therefore be implemented on top of sending and
receiving:
output(Term) :-
    output(Term, []).
C.2 A native node on top of SWI-Prolog                                            373



output(Term, Options) :-
    self(Self),
    parent(Parent),
    option(target(Target), Options, Parent),
    Target ! output(Self, Term).

input(Prompt, Input) :-
    input(Prompt, Input, []).

input(Prompt, Input, Options) :-
    self(Self),
    parent(Parent),
    option(target(Target), Options, Parent),
    Target ! prompt(Self, Prompt),
    receive({
        ’$input’(Target, Input) -> true
    }).

respond(Pid, Input) :-
    self(Self),
    Pid ! ’$input’(Self, Input).
The sender identity in the private response term prevents an unrelated process from
satisfying the prompt accidentally. Transport adapters convert the outward-facing
output/2 and prompt/2 events into JSON, terminal output, or another presentation
protocol as appropriate.



C.2.5 Private databases and source installation

An actor needs a private clause database, not merely a private stack and mailbox.
A native implementation can create a temporary module for each actor, load the
requested src * material into it, and arrange for the actor goal to resolve against
that module. Node-published predicates may be imported deliberately, while another
client’s session module must remain invisible.
   This boundary is easy to weaken accidentally. If a spawned goal retains an
unrestricted module reference to its creator, the child can observe later changes
to the creator’s dynamic database. That is sharing, not source installation. The
implementation must instead copy explicitly requested predicates or source text into
the child context and expose shared node state only through the node’s public surface.
   Browser actors obtain a stronger version of this separation as a consequence of
their execution substrate: each Worker contains a distinct Prolog virtual machine.
Native temporary modules must emulate the language-level part of that isolation
inside one host process.
374                                                   C How to implement a Prolog node

   Fresh private state does not require recompiling immutable runtime support. The
current native implementation compiles the standard actor-I/O predicates once and
imports them into each trusted actor module. Requested src * material, dynamic
predicates, and all other actor-specific state remain in the fresh temporary module.
Public sandboxed actors retain actor-local I/O wrappers, since the sandbox uses their
locality to distinguish actor I/O from unrestricted stream I/O. The effect of this
prepared runtime module is measured in Appendix D.



C.2.6 Distribution and toplevel actors

Network transparency is most easily implemented by keeping local actor operations
behind a dispatch layer. A local pid is resolved to a thread; a remote pid is resolved
to a connection and encoded as a protocol message. The public spawn/3, send/2,
exit/2, and monitor predicates need not know which branch was taken.
   Remote communication adds responsibilities not visible in the pedagogical actor
core: connection ownership, handshake and version negotiation, reconnection pol-
icy, pending-command correlation, remote monitor delivery, term conversion, and
cleanup when a WebSocket closes. The owner of the remote node must also revali-
date source, goals, and capabilities rather than trust a decision made by the sending
node.
   Toplevel actors reuse the same substrate. Their PTCP implementation was de-
veloped in Section 5.3. In the current runtime, toplevel halt/1 terminates the
actor through exit/2; toplevel halt/2 installs a private monitor and waits until
termination has been observed. This works even when the toplevel is computing a
nonterminating goal, provided that the substrate supports hard termination.



C.3 Sandboxing, isolation, and capability control

A production-quality node must enforce a boundary strong enough for running
untrusted client code. Four concerns must be kept distinct:
Expressibility.
    Which language constructs and built-in predicates may client code invoke?
Authority.
    Which actors, services, node-owned predicates, and external resources may the
    computation affect?
Isolation.
    What prevents the Prolog runtime or a fault in its sandbox from escaping into
    the host or interfering with another computation?
Resource consumption.
    How much CPU time, memory, actor space, mailbox space, output, and network
    activity may the computation consume?
C.3 Sandboxing, isolation, and capability control                                     375

No single mechanism answers all four questions.



C.3.1 Whitelist and blacklist strategies

A language-level sandbox may be organised as a whitelist or a blacklist. Whitelist-
ing permits only predicates explicitly declared safe. Blacklisting exposes a defined
language fragment but excludes specified predicates, meta-call paths, and capability
families.
   For a full reflective Prolog system, whitelisting is the safer starting point. Au-
thority may otherwise be reconstructed indirectly through meta-calling, predicate
inspection, dynamic database operations, foreign predicates, parser changes, or un-
restricted module qualification. A newly added host predicate is denied until it has
been examined.
   Blacklisting becomes more plausible when the exposed language is already nar-
row, the dangerous host facilities are absent or unreachable, and all meta-level paths
are checked recursively. It remains one layer of a security architecture, not a sufficient
foundation for trust. The demonstrator supports both strategies because they make
different trade-offs between compatibility and conservative denial.



C.3.2 Language sandboxing and host isolation

Language sandboxing decides what client code can express. Host isolation decides
what the runtime process itself can do. A perfect predicate whitelist does not protect
against a defect in the Prolog system or a foreign library. Conversely, a container with
no useful filesystem or network authority does not prevent one client from reading
another client’s Prolog clauses if the language-level isolation is wrong.
   A robust native deployment therefore places the Prolog process inside an
operating-system, container, or virtual-machine boundary with minimal ambient
authority. The Prolog sandbox, node capability policy, and host boundary then fail
independently rather than standing or falling together.



C.3.3 WASM and WASI

WebAssembly provides another useful host boundary. In the browser, a WASM
runtime inherits the browser’s origin and Worker security model. In a standalone
embedding, WASI-style capabilities can make filesystem handles, sockets, and host
callbacks absent unless explicitly granted.
    This substantially reduces ambient authority, but it does not solve Prolog-level
reflection or resource exhaustion. Nor should a browser-resident demonstrator engine
376                                                   C How to implement a Prolog node

be confused with the server sandbox: code executed in the visitor’s browser runs with
the authority available to that page or Worker and is not governed by the remote node’s
Prolog sandbox.



C.3.4 Capability control inside the node

Even a host-isolated runtime needs an internal authority policy. Ordinary clients
should receive session-scoped capabilities: bounded calls, actor creation within their
containment scope, messaging to permitted targets, and access to explicitly exported
services.
    Node owners may possess additional capabilities for publishing services, register-
ing public names, installing persistent code, modifying shared node state, inspecting
operations, or detaching services from a client session. These operations must not
become available merely because a client can name the predicate that implements
them.
    The implementation should therefore establish a principal at the transport bound-
ary, carry that principal into nested execution and actor creation, and check authority
at every operation that crosses from client-owned state into node-owned state.



C.3.5 Resource governance

Timeouts, actor limits, mailbox bounds, RPC limits, source-size limits, cache bounds,
and rate limits answer a different question from sandboxing: how much may this
program do? A program can remain within its language authority and still deny
service by spawning actors, constructing enormous terms, producing unbounded
output, or repeatedly invoking expensive public relations.
   Limits must be associated with an owner or principal rather than applied only
to individual calls. Otherwise a client can remain below every per-call limit while
exceeding the node’s capacity through multiplicity. The runtime also needs a policy
for cleanup: refusing new work is insufficient if abandoned actors, sessions, cached
continuations, and queues remain resident.



C.3.6 A layered deployment strategy

A realistic public implementation combines all four layers:
 1. expose only the intended Web Prolog language and public relation surface;
 2. associate every request and spawned computation with a principal and capability
    policy;
 3. bound calls, sessions, actors, queues, source, results, and network activity;
C.4 A browser-resident node                                                       377

 4. deploy the runtime with minimal host authority and secure transport; and
 5. make denials, saturation, lifecycle events, and policy changes observable to the
    node owner.

Security is therefore an architectural property of the request path, not a predicate
that can be called immediately before call(Goal).



C.4 A browser-resident node

Prolog can be brought into a browser by interpreting or compiling it in JavaScript,
by compiling an existing system to WebAssembly, or by installing a browser exten-
sion. The demonstrator uses SWI-Prolog’s WebAssembly port. Its implementation
problem is not merely how to run a Prolog query, but how to reproduce the actor and
node abstractions on a single-threaded browser substrate.



C.4.1 Implementing a browser node

Cooperative engines are not isolated actors

The SWI-Prolog WASM interface lets JavaScript call into a Prolog virtual machine.
Open queries and engines can retain search state and yield control to JavaScript. A
heartbeat based on an inference budget allows asynchronous query drivers to return
periodically to the browser event loop.
   This is useful cooperative execution, but it is not actor isolation. Engines inside
one WASM instance share a virtual machine and global Prolog state, and only one
of them executes WASM instructions at a time. A synchronous call, a long-running
foreign operation, or JavaScript that does not yield can still seize that VM. Another
engine in the same instance cannot forcibly terminate it.
   The distinction determines the architecture. If actors shared one single-threaded
instance, a non-cooperative actor could prevent every other actor in the node from
receiving messages. It could also compromise the private-state model unless a second
isolation mechanism were built inside the VM.


One Worker and one VM per actor

The demonstrator therefore runs each local browser actor in its own Web Worker,
with a complete and private SWI-Prolog WASM instance. A JavaScript node con-
troller remains on the main thread. It owns pid allocation, actor and name registries,
monitors, delayed sends, Worker lifecycles, remote connections, stateless HTTP
calls, the terminal, and the page.
378                                                      C How to implement a Prolog node

    An ordinary actor executes the goal passed to spawn/1-3. A toplevel actor runs
the mailbox-driven PTCP loop. The shell’s toplevel is also a PTCP actor in a Worker;
it is special only because the controller creates it directly, attaches the terminal to it,
and can replace its Worker during a hard shell reset.
    Each Worker has its own linear memory, stacks, dynamic database, modules,
atoms, and virtual filesystem. A non-yielding actor blocks only its Worker, and
the controller can terminate that Worker. This is the browser equivalent of the
containment that native actors obtain from the runtime’s ability to interrupt a thread.
    The cost is actor density. Every actor instantiates a VM and grows private memory,
so Worker start-up and per-Worker memory are much larger than the cost of an
Erlang process or a native Prolog thread. Pools could reduce start-up latency, but
multiplexing actors onto a shared Worker would give up some of the isolation that
motivates the design.


Terms on the wire

Workers cannot exchange Prolog heap objects. The sending Worker serialises a
message as text, the controller routes the text, and the receiving Worker parses it
into a fresh term. Variable bindings are therefore lost exactly as they are in a remote
send.
    Using the same representation locally and remotely has a useful consequence:
local browser communication is not a privileged semantic fast path. Cyclic terms,
attributed variables, streams, and non-text blobs are rejected at the boundary, while
ordinary acyclic Prolog terms are copied. An implementation using native threads
may copy terms more directly, but it must preserve the same observable contract if
location transparency is to hold.


The DOM stays on the main thread

A Worker has no direct access to window or document. This is not merely an
inconvenience. The DOM is a stateful, location-bound, single-threaded resource,
precisely the kind of resource that actor systems normally place behind a message
interface.
    The main-thread controller already performs a limited version of this role: it
renders terminal output and delivers user input to the shell actor. A general application
can use the same pattern. A Worker-resident application actor sends presentation
messages to a main-thread view component, and the view returns browser events as
actor messages. The application logic then has the same shape whether the actor is
in the current tab or on a remote node.
    This arrangement also fits component frameworks such as React or Vue.
Framework-owned DOM is updated by changing component state, not by allow-
ing an external Prolog engine to mutate reconciled nodes. An actor subscription can
feed that state in the same way as a WebSocket or another asynchronous data source.
C.5 Alternative implementation approaches                                                      379

The optional main-thread mode

There is one useful exception. A self-contained Prolog page may want direct DOM
access and may be willing to run a Prolog engine on the main thread. The demonstra-
tor supports such a mode. It can use the browser integration facilities of SWI-WASM
directly, including yielding while waiting for asynchronous input.
   The trade-off is local and explicit. The main-thread engine has DOM access but
lacks Worker isolation and hard termination. Actors it spawns still run in Workers,
and its calls and messages use the same public contracts as the default model. Portable
code can inspect such genuine host differences through runtime property/1 rather
than infer them from a pid or node URI.


Summary of the browser architecture

The browser node can therefore be summarised as follows:
   A JavaScript controller on the main thread owns routing, networking, lifecycle, terminal, and
   page; each local actor owns an independent SWI-Prolog WASM instance in a Web Worker;
   messages cross Worker and node boundaries as portable Prolog terms; and an optional
   main-thread engine is available for the specialised case of a self-rendering page.

This is not necessarily the optimal browser architecture for all future Prolog sys-
tems. A threaded WASM port or a dedicated actor VM could support much lighter
processes. The worker-per-actor design is instead a faithful realisation of actor iso-
lation on the substrate available to the demonstrator. Its main achievement is that a
local browser actor and a remote actor differ in placement and cost, but not in the
programming model through which they are addressed.



C.5 Alternative implementation approaches

C.5.1 Other Prolog systems and host languages

A node need not be based on SWI-Prolog. Another Prolog system may offer threads,
engines, modules, HTTP, or WebSocket facilities with different names and guaran-
tees. The implementation task is to reproduce the observable Web Prolog contracts,
not the internal structure of the demonstrator.
   Nor must every node contain a general-purpose Prolog system. A RELATION
node can be written in Python, Rust, Erlang, Java, or another host language if it
accepts the specified calls, performs the advertised relation, and returns conforming
answers. More capable profiles require increasingly complete implementations of
unification, control, source installation, private databases, and actor semantics.
   An Erlang-based implementation is particularly interesting. Erlang already pro-
vides lightweight isolated processes, mailboxes, distribution, monitors, and supervi-
380                                                    C How to implement a Prolog node

sion, but it does not provide Prolog unification, backtracking, or the Web Prolog term
and error contracts. A conforming ACTOR node on the BEAM would therefore be
more than an adapter around an Erlang service: it would combine a Prolog execution
engine with the specified Web Prolog process semantics.



C.5.2 Prospects for a dedicated Web Prolog VM

The BEAM demonstrates what can be achieved by a runtime designed around
lightweight, isolated, pre-emptible processes. It is natural to ask whether a Web
Prolog runtime could combine those properties with unification, logical variables,
nondeterministic search, and dynamic symbolic code.
    An earlier paper described such a runtime as a “holy grail” for Web Prolog
(Lager, 2019). Richard O’Keefe, drawing on experience with both Prolog and Erlang,
responded that the idea was feasible and pointed to the small processes of Logix and
to the lineage connecting the WAM, JAM, BAM, and BEAM. The history does not
supply an implementation, but it does show that the design space is less alien than
the phrase “dedicated VM” may suggest.
    Such a VM would need more than fast process switching. It would have to specify
how backtracking interacts with committed message effects, how heaps and code are
isolated or shared, how a process is interrupted safely, how terms are copied, and
how local execution preserves the same observable semantics as remote execution.
It would also need the network, policy, and administrative layers described earlier in
this appendix.
    A mature existing Prolog system consequently retains major advantages: optimis-
ing compilation, libraries, debugging, tabling, constraints, foreign interfaces, and
decades of operational experience. A dedicated runtime would be justified only if
its gains in actor density, scheduling, isolation, or portability outweighed the cost of
rebuilding that environment.



C.5.3 Less capable profiles need less work

The profile structure allows implementation to proceed incrementally. A RELA-
TION node can expose a single owner-defined predicate without implementing ISO
control constructs. An ISOBASE node can add bounded stateless querying without
persistent sessions. An ISOTOPE node can then add source installation and toplevel
continuation before any general actor distribution is attempted.
   This is not merely a convenience for implementers. Independent implementations
are easier to compare first at a narrow boundary. Agreement on term syntax, answer
forms, errors, paging, and relation visibility provides a base on which the more
demanding lifecycle and concurrency contracts can later be tested.
C.6 Summary                                                                       381

C.6 Summary

There is no single privileged way to implement a Prolog node. A native node may
map actors onto threads and private modules; a browser node may map them onto
Workers and independent WASM instances; a narrow relation node may not contain
a Prolog runtime at all. What makes them nodes on the same Prolog Web is their
agreement at the observable boundaries.
    The implementation task is therefore layered. Query evaluation must preserve
solutions, failure, errors, and paging. Actor execution must preserve mailboxes,
selective receive, lifecycle relations, and location-transparent addressing. Source
installation must preserve private execution contexts. Policy, sandboxing, host isola-
tion, and resource governance must contain work performed for untrusted principals.
Finally, transports must carry the same terms and events without quietly changing
their semantics.
    The demonstrator shows that these layers can be assembled on both native SWI-
Prolog and SWI-WASM. It remains one implementation, however. The decisive
next test is whether the contracts can be stated precisely enough for a different
implementation, built on a different substrate, to interoperate without reproducing
its internal design.
Appendix D
Benchmarking three actor substrates




Performance claims require a more precise subject than a language name. The actor
interface described in this book has three implementations of immediate interest:
browser actors implemented as SWI-WASM Web Workers, native actors imple-
mented as SWI-Prolog threads, and Erlang processes running on the BEAM virtual
machine. They expose similar message-passing patterns, but they realise an actor at
very different levels of granularity.
   This appendix compares those three substrates. It is not a contest between Prolog
and Erlang as languages, nor does it attempt to reduce the usefulness of a program-
ming model to a single number. Its purpose is narrower: to measure some costs
that a programmer can observe, relate them to the implementations described in
Appendix C, and identify where optimisation work would have the greatest effect.



D.1 What is being compared

Table D.1 summarises the three implementations. The unit called an actor is inten-
tionally the same at the interface and intentionally different underneath.


Table D.1 The three actor substrates.
Substrate     Actor representation                     Communication path

Browser node An independent SWI-WASM virtual ma- Messages relayed between Workers by the
             chine in a Web Worker                    browser-side actor bridge
Native node An SWI-Prolog thread with a private actor In-process delivery through the native ac-
             context                                  tor runtime
Erlang       A lightweight BEAM process               In-VM delivery through an Erlang process
                                                      mailbox




                                                                                            383
384                                                   D Benchmarking three actor substrates

These differences make the result partly predictable. A BEAM process is designed to
be created cheaply and in great numbers. A native Web Prolog actor is heavier, since
it is built from a native Prolog thread and its execution context. A browser actor
is heavier again: creating one means starting another Worker, instantiating SWI-
WASM, installing its source, and connecting it to the page-level message router. The
measurements tell us the size of these differences in the current implementations;
they do not establish an intrinsic cost for Web Prolog.



D.2 Method

The measurements reported here were made on 29 July 2026 on a 2023 Apple iMac
with an eight-core M3 processor and 16 GB of memory, running macOS 26.5.1. The
native implementation used SWI-Prolog 10.1.3. The browser implementation used
SWI-WASM 10.1.8 in the Worker-based browser node. The Erlang implementation
used Erlang/OTP 26 with ERTS 14.2.5.
   Three microbenchmarks were used:
Actor lifecycle.
    Start one actor, send it an instruction to stop, wait for its monitor notification, and
    repeat. The timed interval therefore includes actor creation, initialisation, source
    installation where required, one message, termination, and monitor delivery. It is
    an end-to-end actor-lifecycle measurement, not a measurement of the underlying
    thread or process creation primitive alone.
Chained spawning.
    Have each actor create one unlinked child and send it a message, producing a
    chain of actor creations. This reconstructs the older start/1 experiment and
    measures the layer-0 native actor core separately from the full isolated node.
Steady-state ping-pong.
    Create two actors before timing begins, warm them up with 100 round trips, and
    then time 1,000 round trips over the same pair. One round trip consists of a ping
    message and its pong reply. Actor creation and termination are outside the timed
    interval.
Elapsed wall time was measured in microseconds. A short warm-up preceded the
recorded native and Erlang series. The tables report medians: three observations
for the browser lifecycle test, seven for the native lifecycle test, and twenty-one for
Erlang; the native ping-pong median is from eleven observations and the Erlang
median from twenty-one. Browser ping-pong observations required the additional
precaution described in Section D.4.1.
   The chained-spawning medians use seven native observations at 1,000 actors,
five at 10,000 and 100,000, twenty-one Erlang observations at 1,000 and 10,000,
and eleven at 100,000. The final isolated-node check uses nine observations at 1,000
actors.
D.3 Actor lifecycle                                                                385

    The Web Prolog and Erlang programs use the same lifecycle and message pro-
tocols. In particular, links are disabled in Web Prolog where Erlang’s ordinary
unlinked spawning is used, and both versions wait for monitor notifications be-
fore considering an actor terminated. The complete sources are also provided as
benchmarks/actor benchmarks.pl and benchmarks/actor benchmark.erl
in the demonstrator repository.



D.3 Actor lifecycle

The earlier draft of this appendix adapted a chained spawning example from Cesarini
and Thompson (2009). That program is useful for demonstrating rapid process
creation, but it is not a clean measurement of spawning alone. It also interacts badly
with Web Prolog’s default links: Erlang’s spawn creates an unlinked process, whereas
Web Prolog actors are linked by default. An intermediate actor that terminates may
therefore terminate the actor it has just created.
   The present benchmark avoids both problems. It measures a complete, explicitly
unlinked actor lifecycle:
benchmark_lifecycle(Actors, Microseconds) :-
    get_time(T0),
    forall(between(1, Actors, _),
           benchmark_one_lifecycle),
    get_time(T1),
    Microseconds is round((T1-T0)*1_000_000).

benchmark_one_lifecycle :-
    spawn(benchmark_idle, Pid, [
        link(false),
        monitor(true),
        src_predicates([benchmark_idle/0])
    ]),
    Pid ! stop,
    receive({down(Pid, _, true) -> true}).

benchmark_idle :-
    receive({stop -> true}).

Only one child is live at a time. The test consequently measures the cost of repeatedly
creating and reclaiming actors, not the maximum number of simultaneously live
actors. Capacity and memory consumption require a separate experiment.
   The corresponding Erlang operation is:
one_lifecycle() ->
    {Pid, Ref} = spawn_monitor(?MODULE, idle, []),
386                                                      D Benchmarking three actor substrates

      Pid ! stop,
      receive
           {’DOWN’, Ref, process, Pid, normal} -> ok
      end.

idle() ->
    receive stop -> ok end.
Table D.2 gives the median elapsed time for a sequence of complete lifecycles.


Table D.2 Median time for complete actor lifecycles, in milliseconds.

                          Actors Browser node Native node Erlang

                              10          1 271         5.285   0.011
                              30          3 971        15.294   0.035
                             100         13 107        51.478   0.117



The near-linear progression is more informative than the largest number alone. In
this implementation, one Worker actor lifecycle costs about 130 ms, one native actor
lifecycle about 0.515 ms, and one BEAM process lifecycle about 1.2 microseconds.
At 100 actors, the browser node is about 255 times slower than the native node. For
this complete lifecycle operation, the full native node is about 440 times slower than
Erlang.
    These ratios describe the chosen end-to-end operation. The browser and native
measurements include preparation of private Prolog execution contexts; the Erlang
module is already loaded. The table should therefore be read as the price of the actor
abstractions supplied by the three systems, not as a comparison of their lowest-level
schedulers.
    The native result uses a prepared actor-I/O module. Earlier measurements com-
piled the same I/O prelude separately in every actor context, giving 220.594 ms
rather than 51.478 ms for 100 lifecycles. The optimisation does not pool actors
or reuse their mutable modules: every actor still receives a fresh private context,
but imports one immutable implementation of the standard I/O wrappers. Public
sandboxed actors retain actor-local wrappers, since those predicates form part of the
sandbox’s distinction between actor I/O and general stream I/O.



D.3.1 Revisiting the chained spawning test

The lifecycle ratio must not be read as a raw spawning ratio. The older benchmark
used a different program in which every actor creates the next actor in a chain. With
links made explicitly equivalent to Erlang’s ordinary spawn, its Web Prolog form is:
start(Num) :-
D.3 Actor lifecycle                                                                 387

      self(Self),
      start_proc(Num, Self).

start_proc(0, Pid) :- !,
    Pid ! ok.
start_proc(Num, Pid) :-
    Num1 is Num-1,
    spawn(start_proc(Num1, Pid), NPid, [
        link(false)
    ]),
    NPid ! ok,
    receive({ok -> true}).
Each child receives its ok message from its parent and the last actor sends an ok to
the original caller. Unlike the lifecycle test, the program installs no monitor and does
not serialise creation with a complete monitored shutdown.
   The current stand-alone actor core runs the goal in the spawning module’s context,
without the private-module isolation added by the full node. Table D.3 compares
this layer-0 core with Erlang.


Table D.3 Median time for the unlinked actor chain, in milliseconds.

                            Actors Native actor core Erlang Ratio

                             1 000             30.926 0.589 52.5
                            10 000            307.601 6.242 49.3
                           100 000          3 081.924 58.060 53.1



The current layer-0 spawning gap is therefore about 50 times, not 1,900 times. The
historical results in the earlier draft were also internally consistent: 23.918 seconds
versus 0.089440 seconds at 100,000 actors is a ratio of about 267, while 251.514
seconds versus 0.644545 seconds at one million actors is a ratio of about 390.
Describing the first point as “roughly 250 times” was reasonable, but it was not a
constant factor across the two sizes.
   The current core is considerably faster than the version measured by that older
experiment. Running the same chain through the full current native node still prepares
a new private Prolog context at every generation, but imports the prepared actor-I/O
implementation rather than compiling it again. It also omits the post-load repair
pass when an actor has no source to load: without source, no imported predicate or
hook-installed module state can have been shadowed.
   Profiling then exposed a less obvious cost in the distribution layer. Ten-digit
pids were generated with random between/3. Since every generation of the chain
spawns from a fresh Prolog thread, every generation also paid for initialising that
thread’s pseudo-random state. The current allocator draws five bytes from the process
CSPRNG, rejects the short tail that would introduce modulo bias, and retains the
388                                              D Benchmarking three actor substrates

same unpredictable, currently unused ten-digit pid space. Thus the optimisation
changes neither pid shape nor the fact that pids are unguessable identifiers.
   With both changes, the full native node completes the 1,000-actor chain in
74.170 ms, against 0.589 ms for Erlang – a ratio of about 126. Temporary mod-
ule creation and destruction by themselves cost about 2.4 microseconds per actor
on this machine; complete source-free module preparation raises that to about 8.8
microseconds. Fresh private contexts are therefore no longer the dominant cost in
this test.
   These optimisations were prompted by an initial median of 2,020.966 ms, or
about 3,431 times the Erlang result. Repeating the test with a stable goal module
made no material difference. Importing prepared actor I/O first reduced the median
to 296.305 ms; omitting source-free repair reduced a fresh comparison from 285.900
to 274.051 ms; and removing per-thread pseudo-random initialisation produced the
final 74.170 ms result. The large initial ratio was therefore chiefly a measurement
of repeatedly compiling identical runtime support, followed by a distribution-layer
pid-allocation cost, rather than an inherent requirement of private actor contexts.
   The apparently conflicting ratios thus answer three different questions: the his-
torical implementation gave roughly 267–390 times for its chain; the current layer-0
actor core gives roughly 50 times for the same chain; and the optimised full current
node gives roughly 126 times when fresh private context construction and distributed
pid handling are included.



D.4 Steady-state message passing

Actor startup would dominate a short browser ping-pong test. The benchmark there-
fore starts its two actors first and reuses them:
benchmark_ping_once(Ping, N, Microseconds) :-
    self(Self),
    get_time(T0),
    Ping ! run(N, Self),
    receive({ping_done -> true}),
    get_time(T1),
    Microseconds is round((T1-T0)*1_000_000).

benchmark_ping_server(Pong) :-
    receive({
        run(N, From) ->
            benchmark_ping_rounds(N, Pong),
            From ! ping_done,
            benchmark_ping_server(Pong);
        stop ->
            true
    }).
D.4 Steady-state message passing                                                   389



benchmark_ping_rounds(0, _) :- !.
benchmark_ping_rounds(N, Pong) :-
    self(Self),
    Pong ! ping(Self),
    receive({pong -> true}),
    N1 is N-1,
    benchmark_ping_rounds(N1, Pong).

benchmark_pong_server :-
    receive({
        ping(Ping) ->
            Ping ! pong,
            benchmark_pong_server;
        stop ->
            true
    }).
The omitted setup routine starts and monitors both actors, with their default links
disabled. It performs the warm-up and calls benchmark ping once/3 for each
observation. Finally, it stops both actors and receives both monitor notifications. The
Erlang program uses the same sequence.


Table D.4 Steady-state time and throughput for 1,000 round trips.

                   Substrate       Median time Round trips/s Relative rate

                   Browser node       1 110 ms            901           1.0
                   Native node       17.087 ms         58 524          65.0
                   Erlang             0.580 ms      1 724 138       1 914.0



Moving actor creation outside the timed interval narrows the gap, but does not
remove it. The native node completes about 65 times as many round trips per second
as the browser node. Erlang in turn completes about 29 times as many as the native
node. The browser path crosses two Worker boundaries and the page-level relay on
every round trip; the native and BEAM paths remain inside one runtime.



D.4.1 A browser measurement caveat

Repeated browser batches in one page session did not behave as independent observa-
tions. Five consecutive batches of 100 round trips over one actor pair took 33, 49, 66,
84, and 103 ms. Recreating the pair did not remove all of the drift, whereas reloading
390                                                 D Benchmarking three actor substrates

the page did. The cause has not yet been isolated; possible locations include the
Worker relay, retained mailbox or routing state, and demonstrator instrumentation.
   The browser result in Table D.4 is therefore the median of three observations
made in freshly loaded page sessions, followed by a fourth foreground run that
reproduced the result. It should be treated as an indicative measurement of the
current demonstrator, not as a stable limit of SWI-WASM or browser actors. The
drift is also an actionable performance finding: before larger browser benchmarks
are meaningful, the retained state responsible for it should be identified.



D.5 RPC, pagination, and query placement

An earlier version of this appendix also timed a WordNet query distributed over two
HTTP nodes:

rpc(URI1, type(S, v)),
rpc(URI2, word(S, W))
This is a valuable example, but it does not belong in the three-substrate tables. In the
dataset used by that experiment, type(S,v) produced 25,047 solutions. The second
call was therefore made 25,047 times. Most of the elapsed time measured an N+1
remote-query plan: HTTP request construction, network round trips, connection
reuse, and repeated remote setup. Options such as the solution-page limit and
HTTP keep-alive policy could change the result by an order of magnitude without
changing the logical meaning of the query.
    The lesson remains important. Moving a join to the node that holds the relevant
data, batching requests, keeping connections alive, and choosing a suitable page
size can matter more than the raw speed of either Prolog engine. The old numerical
results have not been carried forward, however. They used an earlier rpc/2-3 imple-
mentation, did not include a browser or Erlang equivalent, and did not record enough
information about the WordNet release and node configuration to be reproducible.
    A future RPC benchmark should consequently be reported as a separate transport
and placement experiment. At minimum it should distinguish local execution, one
warm persistent connection, one fresh connection per call, and a genuinely remote
network path; record the dataset and node policies; and report both latency to the
first answer and throughput for all answers.



D.6 Interpretation and limits

For these two workloads, the ordering is unambiguous: the browser node is slowest,
the native node is substantially faster, and Erlang is fastest by a wide margin. The
reasons are architectural. A browser actor is a strong isolation boundary containing
a Prolog virtual machine. A native actor is a lighter thread and Prolog context. A
D.6 Interpretation and limits                                                      391

BEAM process is the unit for which the Erlang virtual machine has been specialised
over several decades.
   That ordering should not be generalised beyond the evidence:

  • The results come from one machine and one set of runtime versions.
  • The browser measurements use the demonstrator in an embedded Chromium-
    based browser, whose exact browser-engine build was not exposed.
  • The benchmark messages are small local terms. It does not measure large-term
    copying, cross-node communication, HTTP, WebSocket transport, or application
    computation.
  • Lifecycle measurements include source and context preparation. A different
    browser architecture – for example, several actors in one Worker – would answer
    a different isolation and performance question.
  • No claim is made here about maximum actor population or memory per actor.
    Those require a capacity benchmark with resource measurements and well-
    defined failure criteria.
The comparison nevertheless gives useful engineering direction. Browser actors
should be used at a granularity that justifies a Worker and an independent Prolog
VM, rather than as replacements for millions of tiny BEAM processes. Native
actors can be substantially finer-grained, although their private Prolog contexts still
make them much heavier than Erlang processes. The public actor semantics remain
common across the substrates; what differs is the cost at which each implementation
currently provides them.
References




Andersen C, Swift T (2023) The janus system: A bridge to new prolog applications.
  In: Prolog: The Next 50 Years, Springer, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol
  13900, pp 93–104
Arias J, Carro M, Salazar E, Marple K, Gupta G (2018) Constraint answer set
  programming without grounding. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
  18(3–4):337–354, DOI 10.1017/S1471068418000285
Armstrong J (2003a) Concurrency oriented programming in Erlang. Invited talk,
  FFG
Armstrong J (2003b) Making reliable distributed systems in the presence of software
  errors. PhD thesis, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm
Armstrong J (2007) A history of erlang. In: Proceedings of the Third ACM SIG-
  PLAN History of Programming Languages Conference (HOPL-III), San Diego,
  California, USA, 9-10 June 2007, pp 1–26, DOI 10.1145/1238844.1238850, URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/1238844.1238850
Barnett J, Akolkar R, Auburn R, Bodell M, Burnett D, Carter J, McGlashan S, Lager
  T, Helbing M, Hosn R, Reifenrath K, Rosenthal N, Roxendal J (2015) State chart
  xml (scxml) state machine notation for control abstraction. w3c recommendation
Beek W, Wielemaker J (2016) SWISH: An integrated semantic web notebook.
  CEUR Workshop Proceedings 1690, URL https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1690/
  paper115.pdf
Berners-Lee T, Hendler J, Lassila O (2001) The semantic web. Scientific Ameri-
  can 284(5):34–43, URL http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?articleID=
  00048144-10D2-1C70-84A9809EC588EF21
Brusk J, Lager T (2008) Developing natural language enabled games in SCXML.
  Journal of Advanced Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics
  (JACIII) 12(2):156–163, DOI 10.20965/jaciii.2008.p0156, URL https://doi.
  org/10.20965/jaciii.2008.p0156
Ceri S, Gottlob G, Tanca L (1989) What you always wanted to know about Datalog
  (and never dared to ask). IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
  1(1):146–166, DOI 10.1109/69.43410



                                                                               393
394                                                                      References

Cesarini F, Thompson S (2009) ERLANG Programming, 1st edn. O’Reilly Media,
  Inc.
Cicirelli F, Furfaro A, Giordano A, Nigro L (2009) Statechart-based actors for
  modelling and distributed simulation of complex multi-agent systems. In: Euro-
  pean Conference on Modelling and Simulation, ECMS 2009, Madrid, Spain,
  June 9-12, 2009, pp 233–239, DOI 10.7148/2009-0233-0239, URL https:
  //doi.org/10.7148/2009-0233-0239
Clark HH, Brennan SE (1991) Grounding in communication. In: Resnick LB, Levine
  JM, Teasley SD (eds) Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition, American Psy-
  chological Association, Washington, DC, pp 127–149, DOI 10.1037/10096-006
Clark KL (1978) Negation as failure. In: Gallaire H, Minker J (eds) Logic and Data
  Bases, Springer, pp 293–322
Clark KL, Gregory S (1986) PARLOG: Parallel Programming in Logic. ACM Press
Costantini S, Tocchio A (2004) The DALI logic programming agent-oriented lan-
  guage. In: Lifschitz V, Niemelä I (eds) Logics in Artificial Intelligence, Lec-
  ture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, vol 3229, Springer, pp 685–688, DOI
  10.1007/978-3-540-30227-8 57
Cropper A, Dumančić S, Evans R, Muggleton SH (2022) Inductive
  logic programming at 30. Machine Learning 111(1):147–172, DOI
  10.1007/s10994-021-06089-1,            URL         https://doi.org/10.1007/
  s10994-021-06089-1
De Raedt L, Kimmig A, Toivonen H (2007) ProbLog: A probabilistic Prolog and
  its application in link discovery. In: Veloso MM (ed) Proceedings of the 20th
  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp 2462–2467
Frühwirth T (2009) Constraint Handling Rules. Cambridge University Press
d’Avila Garcez A, Lamb LC (2023) Neurosymbolic AI: The third wave. Artificial
  Intelligence Review 56(11):12387–12406, DOI 10.1007/s10462-023-10448-w,
  URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10448-w
Garvey C (2018) Broken promises and empty threats: The evolution of AI in the
  USA, 1956–1996. Technology’s Stories 6(1), DOI 10.15763/jou.ts.2018.03.16.02,
  URL https://www.technologystories.org/ai-evolution/
Gelernter D (1985) Generative communication in Linda. ACM Transactions on
  Programming Languages and Systems 7(1):80–112, DOI 10.1145/2363.2433
Gelfond M, Lifschitz V (1988) The stable model semantics for logic programming.
  In: Kowalski RA, Bowen KA (eds) Proceedings of the Fifth International Confer-
  ence and Symposium on Logic Programming, MIT Press, pp 1070–1080
Green TJ, Huang SS, Loo BT, Zhou W (2013) Datalog and recursive query pro-
  cessing. Foundations and Trends in Databases 5(2):105–195, DOI 10.1561/
  1900000017
Gupta G, Salazar E, Shakerin F, Arias J, Varanasi SC, Basu K, Wang H, Li F, Erbatur
  S, Padalkar P, Rajasekharan A, Zeng Y, Carro M (2023) Prolog: Past, present, and
  future. In: Warren DS, Dahl V, Eiter T, Hermenegildo MV, Kowalski R, Rossi F
  (eds) Prolog: The Next 50 Years, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 13900,
  Springer, Cham, pp 48–61, DOI 10.1007/978-3-031-35254-6 4
